Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction in school, a combination that's becoming more important all the time.
Teachers all over the country are finding out that science fiction in the classroom is
a natural at all levels, junior high, high school, and college.
And there's some pretty clear reasons for that too.
Some of the most significant literature of our time is science fiction.
It's relevant, it's vital, and it teaches people how to cope with future shock while entertaining them.
One of the strongest college science fiction programs can be found at the University of Kansas in Lawrence.
English faculty member James Gunn, assisted by colleague Stephen Goldman, runs the program.
Gunn is a science fiction author of long-standing.
His novels include The Immortals, The Listeners, The Joymakers, and The Dreamers.
We ask Gunn about science fiction at the University of Kansas.
Because of our interest here, I think I've attracted some graduate students who are interested in the area, some of whom have gotten degrees, not in science fiction because we don't offer one.
But in science fiction-related areas, I have one graduate student now who's doing his dissertation on my work, and another one who graduated last year,
who did a creative dissertation of a book of science fiction stories.
So we have had that body of graduate students who have taught science fiction classes at the sophomore level as one of the required courses in composition and literature.
And I also traditionally teach a science fiction course, an undergraduate and graduate science fiction course each year, although my primary duties in the English department are the teaching of fiction writing.
Every summer, Gunn is responsible for a unique offering at the University of Kansas.
Perhaps our most interesting science fiction offering, however, is the three-week intensive English Institute on the teaching of science fiction that we offer in the summer.
We realized a number of years ago that there were a lot of people faced with the task, sometimes self-assumed, sometimes assigned, of teaching a science fiction course.
And they were largely unprepared because there had been no academic program on science fiction, certainly not on the teaching of science fiction.
So we set up this intensive three-week workshop to offer teachers the opportunity to attend and get a six-credited hour program in science fiction, in all aspects of science fiction, in just three weeks.
And it's a very intensive experience. We bring in several science fiction writers besides myself. This year we're having Gordon Dixon and Theodore Sturgeon, Frederick Cole, and it has been a most successful and satisfying experience.
The dates of the intensive English Institute on the teaching of science fiction are July 11th to July 29th.
The Institute offers a fascinating opportunity for teachers of science fiction on any level to spend three weeks living and studying science fiction with people who write it and people who teach it.
And there will be two important events held in conjunction with the Teaching Institute, the annual meeting of the Science Fiction Research Association, and the Campbell Award Conference, which will honor the best science fiction novel of the year.
Contact James Gunn at the University of Kansas right away for more information on the intensive English Institute on the Teaching of Science Fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane, one of the most popular and unique fantasy authors ever was J.R.R. Tolkien, whose trilogy about Hobbits, The Lord of the Rings, came out of the 1950s.
Tolkien has become a phenomenon. His books have gone through countless printings. There are Tolkien societies and clubs all over the world, and his Middle Earth has for many readers become a place as real as our own world.
There have been four or five Tolkien organizations in this country and others scattered all over the world, with most successful as the British Tolkien Society.
The Science Fiction Radio Show spoke with Lester Simons, the membership secretary of the Tolkien Society, when he came to this country for a Tolkien moot at the World Science Fiction Convention in Denver.
We asked him to tell us about the Tolkien Society.
The Society was founded in England in 1969 with a very small group of members. The Society has grown gradually over the years, various notices in various books, directory listings and so on.
We now have 1,200 members, approximately, in 26 countries throughout the world. So although we're based in England, I think we have the largest worldwide spread.
One way members of the Tolkien Society correspond among themselves is through the Society's publications.
We have two regular publications. Amonhen is approximately bimonthly, is a bullet in and a newsletter, letters of comment from members, short articles, short poems, small artwork.
It's really for immediate consumption, the ephemeral material.
And the other publication is Malon, the journal, very much more academic. It comes out, we hope, twice a year.
So sometimes we get a Malon and an Amonhen together. Malon is a larger format. It has longer poems, sometimes they run to three pages.
Members own poems in the Tolkien manner. Some of them are imitations of Tolkien style, others are members' own work in their own styles.
Essays, longer book reviews, articles of rather more specific interest, and it is very much less time dependent.
We ask Simons if there were activities in fellowship among members.
Oh yes, considerable. Our local groups are called Smiles. From the Hobbit, Smile is a comfortable Hobbit whole.
And we hope that our members feel as comfortable in our Smiles as they would in a Hobbit home.
We have Smiles in many countries. In some countries there just aren't enough members to get together because they're too widely separated.
But in England there are Smiles all over the country. They run themselves as they wish. Some of them are very formal, some have costume, others don't.
Some publish their own little newsletters with subsequent meeting venues, short reviews, as artwork. It just depends on what the members in any particular area wish to do.
There are also two national meetings annually for the society. One is a formal business meeting, the other is the Oxenmoot, held on a weekend in late September.
And it is a weekend where members who otherwise don't normally see other people come together, Smiles send representative groups.
Other societies send representative groups. This year we should have groups from Stockholm, from... there will be a representative from America.
There will be groups from all over the United Kingdom. And it is just a weekend of being in company of Tolkien people.
More about the Tolkien Society on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. We're speaking with Lester Simons, membership secretary of the Tolkien Society.
The Tolkien Society was founded in 1969 in England and is now a worldwide organization dedicated to the study and appreciation of the works of J.R.R. Tolkien.
We ask Simons if there were differences between American and British Tolkien fans.
Most definitely. American fans are very much more exuberant in the way they go about things.
Some people think we may be a little bit too staid and too formal.
It sounds a little bit high-handed to say so, but it suits our purpose to be more literary and to keep our costume event down to one a year.
If we did everything in costume, then it might lose some of its interest because that is not how we were set up.
The Swedish societies, of which there are three major ones, do things in costume.
They are specifically organized in a manner very similar, in fact, to the American SCA.
They do society for creative anachronism.
They do things in costume with weapons and they have guilds.
But they don't publish quite so much as we do.
There is room in Tolkien fandom for all sorts and it would be a poorer place without either of us.
J.R.R. Tolkien's son and executor Christopher has been going through his father's papers and gathering material for publication.
As a result of his efforts, three volumes have been published, the Silmarillion, Unfinished Tales and the letters of J.R.R. Tolkien.
We ask Simons if any more material might be forthcoming.
Well, there is a great deal of linguistic material still to be published, whether it will be published as a book of linguistic matters,
or whether they will end up as footnotes in other books, I don't know.
There is a great deal of poetry.
The Silmarillion had a remarkable lack of verse, which we are waiting to see.
There may be other tales filling in some gaps in Middle Earth.
But all we know is that there were papers sat in box files on a table eight feet long.
There is a considerable amount of material. How much of it is publishable is not known.
How much of it is readable is, again, a matter for debate because towards the end of his life, the professor's handwriting became not so much untidy as illegible.
And even Christopher can't read it.
Finally, we wondered if there was enough material to keep the Tolkien Society in existence.
Wouldn't it run out of things to do after a while?
Well, there are always new people coming in to the societies. People discover Middle Earth at all ages.
And people will not be asking the same sort of questions, but they will be asking them in different ways.
And as more and more material gets published, interpretations will vary.
I think there will be sufficient interest. After all, Sherlock Holmes Society has been going for some time, and there's now no longer any possibility of more Sherlock Holmes stories.
It doesn't seem to worry them at all.
And with what we already have of Middle Earth, we can keep going for a considerable number of years.
And of course, we mustn't forget that the professor did a lot of pure academic linguistic material, which is very difficult to find, but extremely worthwhile when you can find it.
And that will keep us going for a very, very long time.
Even readers who don't belong to the Tolkien Club would agree that Tolkien's work is one of the greatest achievements in the history of imaginative literature.
And Tolkien's Middle Earth is such a fully realized world, and Tolkien went to such depth in providing background for it, that it does indeed seem unlikely fans could run out of things to study and share.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
One of the most intricately plotted and provocative science fiction novels to come out in recent years is Dean Eng's 1981 book, Systemic Shock.
It concerns a nuclear war, the Third World War, so to speak, that many people today fear.
One of the differences between this treatment of nuclear war, though, and others on the same topic, is the incredible wealth of detail that Eng has provided.
Systemic Shock is a classic example of extrapolation. Eng takes all the major countries on Earth, China, Russia, India, the United States, sets the story in 1996, and shows what could happen if nuclear war broke out.
The novel is so complex in its structure that it obviously is a result of a mince effort, we're asking if it was difficult to write.
You've asked a lot of questions that I have to answer yes to, so you must have really done your homework.
Yeah, it took me years to get all the background for this, especially with Asian and the Indian subcontinent on Asia.
All of the variables, the socio-geopolitical variables of that book were enough to drive me crazy.
I talk for historians, and in the case of India, more than any other case, I think, whatever I suggested as a scenario for the future,
every historian that I would talk to would say, oh no, or every social scientist, no, this can't happen because X, Y, or Z.
Well, if that won't happen, then how about this? No, no, that can't happen. In short, none of them would ever be willing to speculate on what's going to happen to India.
And I pretty much had to work that out about a whole clock. So I had four drawer file cabinets and, oh, perhaps, 500 textbooks by the time I was done putting it all together.
We also asked if the book reflects a serious effort on his part to work out what could happen in such a situation.
Well, yes, seriously enough that some of my friends are friends of mine because, as political scientists or physicists or whatever,
they read the book and said, ooh, an awful lot of scholarly research has gone into this, son, as a guy, and we would meet somewhere and get to be good friends.
That doesn't say much about the popularity of a book, although systemic shock has been a bestseller in science fiction terms anyway.
But it does say a lot about whether or not the work I did is appreciated by experts, and it does seem to be appreciated by experts.
That's the thing that gets to them the most is that the existing problems of Islam, of India, of how Japan and China are going to work out,
the problems that the United States will have, the problems that the Soviets will have 20 years from now, et cetera,
that it simply grips all those bulls by the horns and wrestles them all at the same time.
We wondered if Ying was a military strategy buff.
Well, in a small way, yes, and Reginald Bretner, who is one of the better known science fiction writers and writers about science fiction as well as writers off science fiction,
and Reg has done a book on military strategy.
I listen to him a lot, and of course I borrow stuff from his libraries from time to time.
So, yes, strategy is of some interest.
We'll talk about Dening's systemic shock in more detail in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
And next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
We're talking with Dening about his fascinating 1981 science fiction novel, Systemic Shock.
The book is an immensely detailed scenario of what the world would be like if the Third World War, a nuclear one, broke out.
The protagonist of Systemic Shock is a young man named Quantrill.
After the war starts, he becomes a skilled assassin for what's left of the United States government.
Quantrill doesn't seem to be cast in the mold of the stereotype to science fiction hero.
Well, I entirely agree. Quantrill is not a hero.
Quantrill is a youngster with some very unusual characteristics.
He has abilities that make him very likely to be useful for assassin jobs and so forth.
Does this make him a hero? Not by any means.
For all of his rare abilities, Quantrill is also a great potential to be misused.
He could be a great metaphorically speaking, you know.
He could be an Olympic type pistol as a tool, or he could be a setting tonight special as a tool.
He could be used well, or he could be grossly misused.
And Quantrill is not a genius by any means. There are lots and lots of flaws in the young man.
And he is misused grossly for quite a while.
You can't really very much call a man like that a hero.
And I didn't. I wanted to show Quantrill with all of his foibles and his fingers.
A subplot in the book concerns a refugee family trying to survive on the harsh plateaus of South Texas.
When the mother and father die, only a young girl child, Sandy, is left.
Ying has her adopted, sort of, by a huge Russian boar.
We asked Ying the reason behind this episode.
It happens to be the opinion of zoologists and animal husbandry folks that a pig next to a chimpanzee is just about the most intelligent animal around.
And we know that other animals have adopted human beings, children, babies.
When you find that pigs are that smart, and that they do sometimes really like human beings,
then I wondered how likely it would be that a huge Russian boar might be filmed a tiny human being.
Now, it's also true, and you probably know that as well as I, that around Edwards Plateau there in South Central Texas, there are Russian boars.
Big ones. None of them anything like a thousand pounds.
But having studied it, I found that the biggest Russian boar on record were something like five hundred and fifty pounds.
And a Russian boar that big would be about the size of, almost the size of a Shetland pony.
So it didn't seem to me so terribly unlikely, but that an extremely intelligent hog might befriend a human being,
especially if that human being were completely without weapons of any kind.
Systemic shock is an exceptionally good read, both exciting and thought-provoking.
And readers will be interested to know that there are two sequels. The first is called Single Combat, and it will be out in paperback in October of 1983.
The third book in the series is entitled Wild Country. Ying hasn't finished writing that one yet, but it does say it deals with the later years of Quantrill.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.